**Contains all the scripts for making figures and downstream data-analysis for the paper:**

Microhomology-Mediated Tandem Duplications Are Ubiquitous Drivers of Genome Evolution with Functional and Pathogenic Potential

Xianfang Wei, Wanxin Gong, Yifan Zheng, Yuxin Zhou, Jing Zhang, Xianyuan Wei, Chen Peng, Xiangwei He* & Chao Jiang*

Tandem repeats (TR) are widespread genomic features with significant evolutionary and functional consequences, yet their origins remain incompletely understood. One possible mechanism is Microhomology-mediated Tandem Duplication (MTD), initially identified in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. MTD occurs when single-copy DNA segments with microhomologies at both ends form tandem duplications, which can spontaneously revert to their original single-copy forms. Despite their prevalence in S. pombe, MTDs have not been systematically studied in other organisms. Using whole-genome deep sequencing and newly developed analytical tools, we found that de novo MTDs occur ubiquitously across prokaryotes, eukaryotes, archaea, and viruses. Analysis of 2,245 reference genomes and millions of isolate genomes from 103 prokaryotic and eukaryotic microbial species revealed that MTDs are consistently favored over Non-Microhomology-mediated Tandem Duplications (NMTDs) at all stages of tandem repeat evolution, including initial formation, population-level fixation, and species-wide conservation. In S. cerevisiae, deletion of the mutator gene Rad27 significantly and specifically increased MTD frequency, linking its formation to Rad27-mediated Okazaki fragment maturation, a highly conserved process during DNA replication. Importantly, MTDs were found in microbial genetic variants responsible for oscillatory functions and were dominant in human pathogenic tandem repeat mutations, including those linked to cancers. Our results establish MTD as a prevalent, reversible mutation type with significant functional impacts and a critical role in tandem repeat evolution.


still editing
